first draft a4 group and aggregate (#1992)
deephaven/deephaven-core: demo/web/src/main/notebooks/A. Real-time table ops/A4 Group and aggregate .md

# Grouping and aggregating time series data

In our previous notebook, we showed how to do time series and relational joins on our data. In this notebook, we show how to perform groupings and aggregations with our time series data.

Let's start again by simulating some real-time data. This time we'll use a shorter time interval.

```python

> time_interval = expressionToNanos("T1S")

Reviewer: should you have the imports so this works encase they don't do the prior one?

Author: Yeah I thought about that and I think you're right. I'll change this (and the other notebooks) to be more verbose

```python
group_by_character = daily_data.groupBy("Character")
group_by_boolean = daily_data.groupBy("Boolean")
group_by_odd_even = daily_data.update("IsEven = (Number % 2 == 0)").groupBy("IsEven").dropColumns("IsEven")
```

Just like all other real-time operations in Deephaven, these groupings update in real-time as the source table updates.

Aggregations allow you to perform operations on grouped data. Let's perform some aggregations to compute statistics on our data.

```python
from deephaven import Aggregation as agg, as_list

average_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggAvg("Number")
])

total_average = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg)
average_by_character = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg, "Character")
average_by_boolean = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg, "Boolean")
average_by_even_odd = daily_data.update("IsEven = (Number % 2 == 0)").aggBy(average_agg, "IsEven")
```

We can also compute counts on the data.

```python
boolean_count_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggCount("BooleanCount")
])
boolean_counts = daily_data.aggBy(boolean_count_agg, "Boolean")

character_count_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggCount("CharacterCount")
])
character_counts = daily_data.aggBy(character_count_agg, "Character")

> ```

Reviewer: should have some combined aggregations?

Author: Yeah I can add another one that's a combined aggregation

# Grouping and aggregating time series data

In our previous notebook, we showed how to do time series and relational joins on our data. In this notebook, we show how to perform groupings and aggregations with our time series data.

> Let's start again by simulating some real-time data. This time we'll use a shorter time interval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start again by simulating some real-time data. Here, we'll use a shorter time interval.
```

```python
from deephaven.DateTimeUtils import currentTime, expressionToNanos, minus

time_interval = expressionToNanos("T1S")
offset = expressionToNanos("T60S")
now = currentTime()

daily_data = create_random_table(time_interval, start_time=minus(now, offset))
```

Let's group this data a few different ways based on the columns we have.

```python
group_by_character = daily_data.groupBy("Character")
group_by_boolean = daily_data.groupBy("Boolean")
group_by_odd_even = daily_data.update("IsEven = (Number % 2 == 0)").groupBy("IsEven").dropColumns("IsEven")
```

> Just like all other real-time operations in Deephaven, these groupings update in real-time as the source table updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just like all other real-time operations in Deephaven, these groupings update in real time as the source table updates.
```

> Aggregations allow you to perform operations on grouped data. Let's perform some aggregations to compute statistics on our data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregations allow you to perform operations on grouped data. The query below computes statistics on our data.
```

```python
from deephaven import Aggregation as agg, as_list

average_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggAvg("Number")
])

total_average = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg)
average_by_character = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg, "Character")
average_by_boolean = daily_data.aggBy(average_agg, "Boolean")
average_by_even_odd = daily_data.update("IsEven = (Number % 2 == 0)").aggBy(average_agg, "IsEven")
```

We can also compute counts on the data.

```python
boolean_count_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggCount("BooleanCount")
])
boolean_counts = daily_data.aggBy(boolean_count_agg, "Boolean")

character_count_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggCount("CharacterCount")
])
character_counts = daily_data.aggBy(character_count_agg, "Character")

combo_count_avg_agg = as_list([
    agg.AggCount("ComboCount"),
    agg.AggAvg("AvgNumber = Number")
])
combo_counts_avg = daily_data.aggBy(combo_count_avg_agg, "Boolean", "Character")
```

> Just like the grouped data, these aggregations update in real-time. You don't need to recompute any of the averages or counts, Deephaven natively supports these real-time updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just like the grouped data, these aggregations update in real time. You don't need to recompute any of the averages or counts, Deephaven natively supports these real-time updates.
```
